16_final-projects/rubric.md, before:

# PS239T Final Project Rubric

### Deliverables

A. A github repository containing code, data, results, and a README.md file that clearly describes how to reproduce the project (75% of your grade).

B. A 5-10 minutes presentation summarizing the project, to be delivered in class, Dec 11 (25% of your grade).

### A. The GitHub Repo

Your GitHub repository will be graded based on the following requirements:

1. The repo is called "ps239t-final-project".

2. The repo uses the file structure template in https://github.com/rochelleterman/ps239t-final-project .

3. The repo includes a README.md file that contains the information I asked for in the README.md template above.

4. All of the files have meaningful names. Your scripts use filenames that start with a number pertaining to the order that script is used in the reproduction of your project, i.e. 01_collect-data.ipynb, 02_analysis.R.

5. The data directory contains all the raw data you need for your project, as well as the analysis dataset (the cleaned/merged dataset you use for your analysis). If your data is proprietary or there are other reasons why you don't want to share it, make a note of that in the README.md file. In this case, offer a clear explanation of what data you used, where you obtained it, and why it's not included in the github repo.

6. Your code is organized in separate scripts that perform broad tasks. For instance, one script collects data from the API and exports a csv file, while another script loads that csv file into R and performs visualizations.

7. Each script begins with a set of comments / markdown that clearly explain what the script does. 

8. Each script contains commands for installing / loading required packages.

9. Each script is well commented. There are never more than 3 lines of code without a comment.

10. Each script contains commands for writing respective files to the Data or Results directory.

### B. The Presentation

Your presentation should run 5-10 minutes long and cover the following points (not necessarily in this order):

1. Collecting Data: Where and how did you collect the data? 

2. Constructing the Analysis Dataset: What was involved in cleaning / pre-processing / subsetting / merging the data?

3. Analysis: What kinds of analyses did you perform?

4. Results / Visualization: What results did you find? How did you visualize these results?

5. Challenges: What was the most challenging aspect of the project? How did you solve this problem?

6. Tools: What software tools did you use for this project? If you used anything that we didn't cover in class, be sure to talk about it.

7. Next Steps: How would you take this project forward?

Students are strongly encouraged to showcase a visual of some result. Besides that, you can use whatever technology / visual aids you wish (e.g. slides, code snippets, etc.)

Commit message:

link to final project bcourses

16_final-projects/rubric.md, after:

# PS239T Final Project Rubric

### Deliverables

A. A github repository containing code, data, results, and a README.md file that clearly describes how to reproduce the project (75% of your grade). Submit a link to your repo on bCourses under the "Final Project" assignment.

B. A 5-10 minutes presentation summarizing the project, to be delivered in class, Dec 11 (25% of your grade).

### A. The GitHub Repo

Your GitHub repository will be graded based on the following requirements:

1. The repo is called "ps239t-final-project".

2. The repo uses the file structure template in https://github.com/rochelleterman/ps239t-final-project .

3. The repo includes a README.md file that contains the information I asked for in the README.md template above.

4. All of the files have meaningful names. Your scripts use filenames that start with a number pertaining to the order that script is used in the reproduction of your project, i.e. 01_collect-data.ipynb, 02_analysis.R.

5. The data directory contains all the raw data you need for your project, as well as the analysis dataset (the cleaned/merged dataset you use for your analysis). If your data is proprietary or there are other reasons why you don't want to share it, make a note of that in the README.md file. In this case, offer a clear explanation of what data you used, where you obtained it, and why it's not included in the github repo.

6. Your code is organized in separate scripts that perform broad tasks. For instance, one script collects data from the API and exports a csv file, while another script loads that csv file into R and performs visualizations.

7. Each script begins with a set of comments / markdown that clearly explain what the script does. 

8. Each script contains commands for installing / loading required packages.

9. Each script is well commented. There are never more than 3 lines of code without a comment.

10. Each script contains commands for writing respective files to the Data or Results directory.

### B. The Presentation

Your presentation should run 5-10 minutes long and cover the following points (not necessarily in this order):

1. Collecting Data: Where and how did you collect the data? 

2. Constructing the Analysis Dataset: What was involved in cleaning / pre-processing / subsetting / merging the data?

3. Analysis: What kinds of analyses did you perform?

4. Results / Visualization: What results did you find? How did you visualize these results?

5. Challenges: What was the most challenging aspect of the project? How did you solve this problem?

6. Tools: What software tools did you use for this project? If you used anything that we didn't cover in class, be sure to talk about it.

7. Next Steps: How would you take this project forward?

Students are strongly encouraged to showcase a visual of some result. Besides that, you can use whatever technology / visual aids you wish (e.g. slides, code snippets, etc.)
