Syllabus.md, before:

# PS239T: An Introduction To Computational Tools And Techniques For Social Research

Professor Laura Stoker

GSI Rochelle Terman

Fall 2015

Draft Syllabus

##1. Course Description

This course will provide graduate students the critical technical skills necessary to conduct research in computational social science and digital humanities, introducing them to the basic computer literacy, programming skills, and application knowledge that students need to be successful in further methods work. This course is not an introduction to statistics, computer science, or specialized social science / digital humanities methods. Rather, it is meant as a springboard for students to further their training once the course is finished, whether through campus workshops (e.g. D-Lab workshops), online courses, traditional classrooms, or independent learning.

####Objectives

By the end of the course, students should be able to:

* Understand basic programming terminologies, structures, and conventions
* Navigate and operate effectively in a UNIX environment
* Master basic Git and GitHub workflows
* Write, execute, and debug R code for assignments involving statistical analysis
* Write, execute, and debug Python code for assignments involving data collection and manipulation, as well as other computing tasks
* Collect data through a variety of means, including webscraping and APIs.
* Be familiar with the concepts and tools of a variety of computational social science / digital humanities applications
* Be familiar with the basic guidelines around reproducible research, good scientific computing practices, and ethics/privacy/legal quandaries. 
* Learn independently and train themselves in a variety of computational applications and tasks through online documentation

####Structure

The course is divided into three main sections: skills, applications, and community engagement. The “skills” portion will introduce students to basic computer literacy, terminologies, and programming languages. Specifically, students will learn the basics in the Unix Shell (i.e. Bash), R, Python, and Git. We chose these tools because they are considered by many to be the “core curriculum” for social scientists and humanists who wish to integrate computing into their scholarship. 

The second part of the course provides students the opportunity to use the skills they learned in part 1 towards practical applications. While the realm of possibilities is too great to cover in a single course, we expect to introduce students to automated text analysis, geospatial analysis, webscraping, data collection via APIs, and qualitative data analysis software. Each week will introduce students to a new application. Because of time constraints, we cannot offer a robust training in any one application. Rather, the goal is to introduce the students to a medley of common applications so that they can discover which avenue to pursue in their own research, and what such training would entail.

The third section on community engagement will introduce topics such as ethics and privacy, best practices of reproducible research, scholarly communication and collaboration, and how to further one’s research using UC Berkeley campus resources. 

##2. Logistics

####Personnel

The course is taught by Laura Stoker (stoker@socrates.berkeley.edu) and
Rochelle Terman (rterman@berkeley.edu).

####Time 

Lecture: Tu 4-6P

Section/Lab: Fr 2-4P

####Location

202 Barrows

####Piazza

We will use Piazza for communication (announcements and questions). You should ask questions about class material and problem sets through the course Piazza website so that everyone can benefit from the discussion. We encourage you to respond to each other’s questions as well. Questions of a personal nature can marked Private on Piazza and you can also email us directly.

Find our class page at: https://piazza.com/berkeley/fall2015/ps239t/home

####GitHub

All course materials will be posted on Github at https://github.com/rochelleterman/PS239T, including class notes, code demonstrations, sample data, and assignments. Students are encouraged to add commits to these materials, for example if they find a particularly helpful resource that would aid other students. Students are required to use GitHub for their final projects, which will be publically available, unless they have special considerations (e.g. proprietary data). 

####Accessibility

This class is committed to creating an environment in which everyone can participate, regardless of background, discipline, or disability. If you have a particular concern, please come to us as soon as possible so that we can make special arrangements.

##3. Course Requirements and Grades

####Final Grades

This is a graded class based on the following:
* Completion of assigned homework (50%)
* Participation (25%)
* Final project (25%)

####Homework

Homework will be assigned at the end of every session. It will be due at the start of the following class unless otherwise  noted. The assignments will be frequent but each of them should be fairly short. You are encouraged to work in groups, but the work you turn in must be your own. Group submission of homework, or turning in copies of the same code or output, is not acceptable. Remember, the only way you actually learn how to write code is to write code.

####Class Participation

The class participation portion of the grade can be satisfied in one or more of the following ways:
1. asking and answering questions in class
2. contributing to class discussion through the Piazza site, and/or
3. collaborating with the campus computing community, either by attending a D-Lab or BIDS workshop, submitting a pull request to a campus github repository (including the class repository), or other involvement in the social computing / digital humanities community. 

####Final Project

The final project consists of using the tools we learned in class on your own data of interest. Students are required to write a short proposal by November 10 (no more than 2 paragraphs) in order to get approval / feedback from the instructors.

##4. Class Activities and Materials

####Activities and Guest Speakers

Classes will follow a “workshop” style, combing lecture and lab formats. We envision the class to be as interactive / hands on as possible, with students programming every session. During the “skills” part of the class, we will be learning how to program in Unix, Python, and R by following a set of course notes with demonstrations. 

During the “applications” section, we will be following a similar structure with the possibility of guest speakers leading the class on specific tools. These guest speakers will be members of the campus computer who are experts in the respective tool that they teaching. 

####Section

The Friday "lab" section will be an informal session dedicated to helping students with materials from lecture and homework. It will be mostly student led, so come with questions. If there are no questions, the lab turns into a "hackathon" where groups can work on the assignments together. It is not required but *strongly* encouraged, especially if you are having difficulty with the assignments. 

####Computer Requirements

The software needed for the course is as follows:

* Access to the UNIX command line (e.g., a Mac laptop, a Bash wrapper on Windows)
* Git
* R and RStudio (latest versions)
* A scientific Python distribution including Python, iPython and iPython notebooks, and major packages.

This requires a computer that can handle all this software. Almost any mac will do the job. 

See [Install.md](Install.md) for more information.

####Books and Other Resources

There are no official textbooks for this class. There is a list of topic-specific tutorials and resources in the GitHub repo in the document `resources.md`. If you find a good online resources, you are encouraged to add to the document. 

##5. Curriculum Outline

The following is a sketchy outline of the curriculum. Applications will be drawn from the following list, depending on interest: automated text analysis, machine learning, geospatial analysis, network analysis, data collection via APIs, crowdsourcing and online experiments, and data visualization. We will include a range of substantive topics from which to draw our data and examples, including humanities oriented topics, to demonstrate the broad application of such tools across all realms of social inquiry.

1. **Sept 1** - Introduction
2. **Sept 8** - Unix, Bash, and Git
3. **Sept 15** - Python: (Basics)
4. **Sept 22** - Python: (Pythonic Code)
5. **Sept 29** - Python: (Information Retrieval)
6. **Oct 6** - R: (Basics)
7. **Oct 13** - R: (Data Analysis)
8. **Oct 20** - R: (Visualization)
9. **Oct 27** - Web Scraping
10. **Nov 3** - APIs
11. **Nov 10** - Text Analysis
12. **Nov 17** - GeoSpatial (Guest Speaker)
13. **Nov 24** - AtlasTI (Guest Speaker)
14. **Dec 1** - Git
15. **Dec 14** - Final projects due

Commit message:

numbering assignments, updating install and syllabus

Syllabus.md, after:

# PS239T: An Introduction To Computational Tools And Techniques For Social Research

Professor Laura Stoker

GSI Rochelle Terman

Fall 2015

Draft Syllabus

##1. Course Description

This course will provide graduate students the critical technical skills necessary to conduct research in computational social science and digital humanities, introducing them to the basic computer literacy, programming skills, and application knowledge that students need to be successful in further methods work. This course is not an introduction to statistics, computer science, or specialized social science / digital humanities methods. Rather, it is meant as a springboard for students to further their training once the course is finished, whether through campus workshops (e.g. D-Lab workshops), online courses, traditional classrooms, or independent learning.

####Objectives

By the end of the course, students should be able to:

* Understand basic programming terminologies, structures, and conventions
* Navigate and operate effectively in a UNIX environment
* Master basic Git and GitHub workflows
* Write, execute, and debug R code for assignments involving statistical analysis
* Write, execute, and debug Python code for assignments involving data collection and manipulation, as well as other computing tasks
* Collect data through a variety of means, including webscraping and APIs.
* Be familiar with the concepts and tools of a variety of computational social science / digital humanities applications
* Be familiar with the basic guidelines around reproducible research, good scientific computing practices, and ethics/privacy/legal quandaries. 
* Learn independently and train themselves in a variety of computational applications and tasks through online documentation

####Structure

The course is divided into three main sections: skills, applications, and community engagement. The “skills” portion will introduce students to basic computer literacy, terminologies, and programming languages. Specifically, students will learn the basics in the Unix Shell (i.e. Bash), R, Python, and Git. We chose these tools because they are considered by many to be the “core curriculum” for social scientists and humanists who wish to integrate computing into their scholarship. 

The second part of the course provides students the opportunity to use the skills they learned in part 1 towards practical applications. While the realm of possibilities is too great to cover in a single course, we expect to introduce students to automated text analysis, geospatial analysis, webscraping, data collection via APIs, and qualitative data analysis software. Each week will introduce students to a new application. Because of time constraints, we cannot offer a robust training in any one application. Rather, the goal is to introduce the students to a medley of common applications so that they can discover which avenue to pursue in their own research, and what such training would entail.

The third section on community engagement will introduce topics such as ethics and privacy, best practices of reproducible research, scholarly communication and collaboration, and how to further one’s research using UC Berkeley campus resources. 

##2. Logistics

####Personnel

The course is taught by Laura Stoker (stoker@socrates.berkeley.edu) and
Rochelle Terman (rterman@berkeley.edu).

####Time 

Lecture: Tu 4-6P

Section/Lab: Fr 2-4P

####Location

202 Barrows

####bCourses

We will use bCourses for communication (announcements and questions) and turning in assignments. You should ask questions about class material and problem sets through the bcourse website so that everyone can benefit from the discussion. We encourage you to respond to each other’s questions as well. Questions of a personal nature can be emailed to us directly.

####GitHub

All course materials will be posted on Github at https://github.com/rochelleterman/PS239T, including class notes, code demonstrations, sample data, and assignments. Students are encouraged to add commits to these materials, for example if they find a particularly helpful resource that would aid other students. Students are required to use GitHub for their final projects, which will be publically available, unless they have special considerations (e.g. proprietary data). 

####Accessibility

This class is committed to creating an environment in which everyone can participate, regardless of background, discipline, or disability. If you have a particular concern, please come to us as soon as possible so that we can make special arrangements.

##3. Course Requirements and Grades

####Final Grades

This is a graded class based on the following:
* Completion of assigned homework (50%)
* Participation (25%)
* Final project (25%)

####Homework

Homework will be assigned at the end of every session. It will be due at the start of the following class unless otherwise  noted. The assignments will be frequent but each of them should be fairly short. You are encouraged to work in groups, but the work you turn in must be your own. Group submission of homework, or turning in copies of the same code or output, is not acceptable. Remember, the only way you actually learn how to write code is to write code.

####Class Participation

The class participation portion of the grade can be satisfied in one or more of the following ways:
1. asking and answering questions in class
2. contributing to class discussion through the Piazza site, and/or
3. collaborating with the campus computing community, either by attending a D-Lab or BIDS workshop, submitting a pull request to a campus github repository (including the class repository), or other involvement in the social computing / digital humanities community. 

####Final Project

The final project consists of using the tools we learned in class on your own data of interest. Students are required to write a short proposal by November 10 (no more than 2 paragraphs) in order to get approval / feedback from the instructors.

##4. Class Activities and Materials

####Activities and Guest Speakers

Classes will follow a “workshop” style, combing lecture and lab formats. We envision the class to be as interactive / hands on as possible, with students programming every session. During the “skills” part of the class, we will be learning how to program in Unix, Python, and R by following a set of course notes with demonstrations. 

During the “applications” section, we will be following a similar structure with the possibility of guest speakers leading the class on specific tools. These guest speakers will be members of the campus computer who are experts in the respective tool that they teaching. 

####Section

The Friday "lab" section will be an informal session dedicated to helping students with materials from lecture and homework. It will be mostly student led, so come with questions. If there are no questions, the lab turns into a "hackathon" where groups can work on the assignments together. It is not required but *strongly* encouraged, especially if you are having difficulty with the assignments. 

####Computer Requirements

The software needed for the course is as follows:

* Access to the UNIX command line (e.g., a Mac laptop, a Bash wrapper on Windows)
* Git
* R and RStudio (latest versions)
* A scientific Python distribution including Python, iPython and iPython notebooks, and major packages.

This requires a computer that can handle all this software. Almost any mac will do the job. 

See [Install.md](Install.md) for more information.

####Books and Other Resources

There are no official textbooks for this class. There is a list of topic-specific tutorials and resources in the GitHub repo in the document `resources.md`. If you find a good online resources, you are encouraged to add to the document. 

##5. Curriculum Outline

The following is a sketchy outline of the curriculum. Applications will be drawn from the following list, depending on interest: automated text analysis, machine learning, geospatial analysis, network analysis, data collection via APIs, crowdsourcing and online experiments, and data visualization. We will include a range of substantive topics from which to draw our data and examples, including humanities oriented topics, to demonstrate the broad application of such tools across all realms of social inquiry.

1. **Sept 1** - Introduction
2. **Sept 8** - Unix, Bash, and Git
3. **Sept 15** - Python: (Basics)
4. **Sept 22** - Python: (Pythonic Code)
5. **Sept 29** - Python: (Information Retrieval)
6. **Oct 6** - R: (Basics)
7. **Oct 13** - R: (Data Analysis)
8. **Oct 20** - R: (Visualization)
9. **Oct 27** - Web Scraping
10. **Nov 3** - APIs
11. **Nov 10** - Text Analysis
12. **Nov 17** - GeoSpatial (Guest Speaker)
13. **Nov 24** - AtlasTI (Guest Speaker)
14. **Dec 1** - Git
15. **Dec 14** - Final projects due
